differentiate CREATE from MERGE, and add section on concurrent transactions (#1635)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/clauses/create.adoc

[[query-create]]
= CREATE

The `CREATE` clause allows you to create nodes and relationships.
To define these entities, `CREATE` uses a syntax similar to that of xref::clauses/match.adoc[`MATCH`].
However, while xref::patterns/index.adoc[patterns] only need to evaluate to either true or false, the syntax for `CREATE` needs to specify exactly what nodes and relationships to create.

> Unlike xref:clauses/merge.adoc[`MERGE`], which first checks for a match and only creates anything if nothing is found, `CREATE` always creates the given pattern, regardless of whether matching ones exist.

Reviewer: "matching ones", is that 'matching patterns'?

Author: ```suggestion
Unlike xref:clauses/merge.adoc[`MERGE`], which first checks for a match and only creates anything if nothing is found, `CREATE` always creates the given pattern, regardless of whether matching patterns exist.
```

This query creates the `Person` nodes for Charlie Sheen and Oliver Stone and the `Movie` node for Wall Street.
It also created the relationships of the types `ACTED_IN` and `DIRECTED` between them.

[[comparing-create-and-merge]]
== Comparing `CREATE` and `MERGE`

`CREATE` and `MERGE` are both used to add nodes and relationships to the graph, but they differ in how they handle existing data.

`CREATE` unconditionally creates a new node or relationship, without checking whether a matching one already exists.
Running the same `CREATE` statement multiple times will therefore produce duplicate entries.

.Two identical `CREATE` statements will create two separate but identical entities
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE (:Person {name: "Alice"})
CREATE (:Person {name: "Alice"})
----

> `CREATE` does not check for existing matches, so it will create duplicates unless a xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-property-uniqueness-constraints[uniqueness constraint]/xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-key-constraints[key constraint]key prevents it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CREATE` does not check for existing matches, so it will create duplicates unless a xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-property-uniqueness-constraints[uniqueness constraint] or xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-key-constraints[key constraint]key prevents it.
```

> `CREATE` does not check for existing matches, so it will create duplicates unless a xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-property-uniqueness-constraints[uniqueness constraint] or xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-key-constraints[key constraint]key prevents it.

Author: ```suggestion
`CREATE` does not check for existing matches, so it will create duplicates unless a xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-property-uniqueness-constraints[uniqueness constraint] or xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-key-constraints[key constraint] prevents it.
```

With a uniqueness constraint on `:Person(name)`, the second `CREATE` statement above would fail instead.

`MERGE` first attempts to match an existing pattern in the graph.
If a match is found, it uses the existing node or relationship; if not, it creates a new one.
This makes `MERGE` idempotent; running it repeatedly with the same pattern will not create duplicates.

.Two identical `MERGE` statements will result in only one entity, as the second matches the first
[source, cypher]
----
MERGE (:Person {name: "John"})
MERGE (:Person {name: "John"})
----

.When to use `CREATE` and `MERGE`
[cols="1,2,2", options="header"]
|===
| 
| `CREATE` 

> |`MERGE`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `MERGE`
```

| *Duplicates*
| Always creates new data.
| Creates only if no match exists; safe for incremental imports and re-runs.

| *Performance*

> | Fast — no lookup required

Author: ```suggestion
| Fast — no lookup required.
```

Creates a node, bound to the variable `tom`, with the labels `Person`, `Actor`, and `Director` and a `name` property.

[[create-and-concurrent-transactions]]
== `CREATE` and concurrent transactions

> Checking whether a node or relationship already exists before running `CREATE` does not prevent duplicates under link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/database-internals/concurrent-data-access/[concurrent transactions]: concurrent transactions can each perform the check, find no existing node or relationship, and both go on to create one.

Reviewer: "both go on" -> is it only two concurrent transactions? if not, maybe omit "both"

> Checking whether a node or relationship already exists before running `CREATE` does not prevent duplicates under link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/database-internals/concurrent-data-access/[concurrent transactions]: concurrent transactions can each perform the check, find no existing node or relationship, and both go on to create one.

Author: ```suggestion
Checking whether a node or relationship already exists before running `CREATE` does not prevent duplicates under link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/database-internals/concurrent-data-access/[concurrent transactions]: concurrent transactions can each perform the check, find no existing node or relationship, and proceed to create identical entities.
```
